##############################################################################################
################# General considerations about monitoring on Linux systems  ##################
##############################################################################################


-------------------------------------------------------------------
### 1/ What are the main area of concern when monitoring a system?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

#--> Intrusion detection:
Monitor for suspicious or unauthorised activity, such as failed login attempts, unusual network traffic, or unexpected changes in system files. This helps detect potential breaches and attacks early.

#--> Access control and authentcation:
Track login attempts, priviledge escalation, and user permissions. Ensure that only authorized users have access to sensitive resources and that multi-factor authentication is enforced.

#--> Vulberability management: 
Regularly scan for known vulnerabilities in the system and application. Apply security patches promptly to reduce the risk of exploitation.

#--> Firewall and Network security: 
Monitor network traffic to ensure that firewalls, security groups and network configurations are properly protecting the system from external threats.

#--> Log management and analysis: 
Collect and analyse security-related logs (system logs,application logs, etc) for signs of malicious activity. Use centralized log management tools to streamline analysis.

#--> Incident response:
Set up alerts for critical security events and define response protocols to mitigate damage quicly.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 2/ How can you check what are the most memory intensive running processes ?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### Linux ###
#--> $top // $htop // $ps aux --sort=-%mem | head -n 10 (list top 10 processes by memory usage)

### macOs ###
#--> Using Activity monitor or the following commands:
# $top -o mem // $ps aux | sort -nrk 4,4 | head -n 10 (same as higher)

### Windows ###
#--> Using task manager or the following commands:
# $Get-Process | Sort-Object -Property WorkingSet -Descending | Select-Object -First 10 Name, WorkingSet (Displays top 10 processes sorted by memory usage.)
# Using ressource monitor (Win+R, and type "resmon") and go to the memory tab.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 3/ What are log files? Where can you find them on a typical Linux system ?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#--> Log files are text files that record events, activities and messages generated by the operating system, applications, or services. They are crutial for monitoring, troubleshooting, and auditing system behavior. Logs capture errors, warnings, system messages, security events and more.

#--> Addresses:
/var/log/syslog or /var/log/messages  (general system messages)
/var/log/auth.log or /var/log/secure (authentication and authorization logs)
/var/log/dmesg (kernel and boot related messages)
/var/log/apt/ (logs related to package installation, on debian based systems)
/var/log/httpd/ or /var/log/nginx/ (web server logs if apache or nginx)

#--> Commands:
$cat (exibits the log file) $tail (see only the last x of the log file)


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 4/ How can you check who where the last connected users, what they did, when they left ?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#--> $last (outputs username, terminal used, ip address if remote login, login time, session duration, logout time)

#--> $w (This command shows who's currently logged-in, their login times and terminal if being used)

#--> $who (shows a lit of currently logged-in users, their login time and terminal)

#--> $lastlog (shows last login time for all users)


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 5/What are the different metrics of health and performance of a system ? 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
#--> CPU usage
Metric: %
Concern: High CPU usage can indicate overloading or inefficient processes.
#--> Memory usage
Metric: %
Concern: High memory usage or memory leaks can cause slowdowns or crashes.
#--> Disk usage
Metric: % and read/write speeds.
Concern: Low disk space or slow performances can degrade syste performance.
#--> Network utilization
Metric: incoming and outcoming network traffic, bandwidth usage.
Concern: hig traffic or latency can indicate congestion or bottlenecks.
#--> System load
Metric: number of processes in queue
Concern: high load average can suggest the system is overloaded
#--> Disk I/O
Metric: read/write operation per seconds, latency.
Concern:high disk I/O or slow access time
#--> Process status
Metric: list of active processes and their ressourc consumption
Concern: unnecessary or malfunctioning processes consuming ressources.
#--> Temperature
Metric: CPU and system teperature
Concern: Overheating can drain performance and cause damages to harware components.


-------------------------------------------------------------------
### 6/ How can you check the uptime of a machine ?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

#--> The uptime designates the time a system has been running since last reboot. To get the uptime on a linux machine one can use the following commands:
# $uptime (outputs the uptime, curret time, number of users and load average)
# $top (the uptime is displyed in the first line)
# $ cat /proc/uptime (this will show the uptime in seconds, with the first value beeing the uptime and the scond beeing th idle time)


-------------------------------------------------------------------
### 7/ How can you asses the network traffic?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

#--> There are many ways to asses network traffic such as:
$iftop (real time network monitoring)
$nload (incoming and outgoing traffic in real time)
$netstat (network statistics) $netstat -tuln
$tcpdump (packet capture) $tcpdump -i eth0 ()replace eth0 with your interface)
$bandwidthd (traffic monitoring)
#--> If these tools are not preinstalled on your machine, use $sudo apt install --tool--
